## Presentation of your data story for COMM318 _Stories from data_ Final Project

* This folder should contain the files that contain the output of all your data analysis. You can choose how you want to present your data story.
* Update this README file to describe the presentation.

DESCRIPTION: I am writing a personal blog post in the style of a Medium article about the need to focus on practices to increase retention in technology companies to promote diversity. I begin with a personal story about how the topic came to my attention, then I go on to analyze the retention problem, describe solutions, and end with generational changes that I'd like to see as a woman in technology. Throughout the article, I will buttress the claims I make with statistics and data visuals created using open source databases, women in technology studies, and third-party institution reports.

DATA VISUALS: I created all data visuals using Jupyter notebooks that can be found within my data analysis folders. Most plots are made using plotly's interactive plotting libraries.

Draft 1: (link: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DzuQMEK-ZI7GLK7cJmN6YRp7jYgkaQq_q-bCinUUfgs/edit?usp=sharing)

Draft 2: Medium article below (link: https://medium.com/@maggiezhang_36420/heres-how-to-fix-the-diversity-problem-according-to-women-in-tech-9c6befd9bd7c)

---

TITLE: Here's how to fix the diversity problem according to women in tech.


Earlier this fall, I was scrolling through my Facebook feed when a post caught my attention. It was written by an admin of the group Women of Rewriting the Code (RTC), a nation-wide nonprofit advancing women in technology across more than 4,000 universities worldwide.
Groups such as RTC are absolutely instrumental in improving the diversity pipeline in the technology industry by providing support at the university and new graduate level. RTC specifically helps these women by giving them a platform to share their advice, questions, and concerns, and by providing exclusive job opportunities through partnerships with companies who wish to recruit for diversity. I joined the RTC community after hearing about it through one of my friends when I expressed to her how difficult it was to find an internship and to feel confident as a woman in technology.
Source: GALLUP (November 19 - December 17, 2014)I immediately knew what the post was about. A few weeks earlier, I had read numerous posts of women calling out RTC for its partnership with the data-mining firm, Palantir. Palantir's Investigative Case Management software, which tracks the immigration status and whereabouts of people entering the US by collecting large amounts of data on them, enabled hundreds of arrests by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Because Palantir's software negatively affects the families of people of color working in the tech industry, Grace Hopper Conference (GHC), the largest gathering of women in computing, had recently announced that it would be dropping Palantir as a sponsor over its work with ICE.
The admin of the group addressed the issue by maintaining RTC's continuing partnership with Palantir and urging concerned women to simply not apply for Palantir-specific opportunities. Women immediately responded with disappointment in RTC's decision, citing the organization's responsibility to carefully vet partner companies for marginalized communities in technology. Importantly, women raised the issue of RTC's role in improving not just the pipeline for diversity recruiting, but supporting companies which will retain underrepresented minorities and intersectional groups in tech. We've heard about improving the pipeline for women to apply for technical roles, but what is addressed less frequently is the problem of retention.


---

The Retention Problem
There is an inherent uphill battle when it comes to being an early career-woman in technology. Statistically speaking, it is unlikely that women chose a career in technology in the first place. In 1984, 37 percent of computer science majors were women, but by 2015 that number had dropped to 18 percent. If you made it far enough to find yourself working in the technology industry, it becomes even less likely that you will stay, with more than 50% of women in tech leaving the industry by the mid-point of their career. These alarming statistics have brought increasing conversation around the problem of retaining underrepresented groups in tech, but few address the solutions. So, how do we fix retention? First, we must look at the problems.
Source: National Science Board, Science & Engineering Indicators 2018Capital One's Women in Technology report surveyed 250 women who remained in tech careers for at least 8 years and occupied senior roles, and 200 women who left the tech industry after 3+ years. The survey found that 73% of women who stay in tech said they considered leaving their tech careers at some point because of limited opportunity for advancement (27%), unfair compensation compared with male peers (25%), and little support of management (22%). A survey done by Indeed of 1,000 women in tech echoed similar reasons for why women leave: lack of career growth (28.1%), poor management (24.6%), and slow salary growth (24.4%). 
Source: Indeed (2018)Problem: Limited opportunity for advancement
A lot of the focus around diversity right now is tracking the rates of women in technical roles, which is easy with the available data. However, determining the kinds of roles these women are in is far more difficult. 
Source: Reveal from the Center of Investigative Reporting (compiled 2018)One way of understanding women's access to creative technical roles (or lack thereof) is by looking at patents as a measure of the extent to which women are contributing to innovation. A 2012 National Center for Women in Technology (NCWIT) study found that male-only teams accounted for 82–90% of all information technology patents while mixed-sex teams accounted for 8–15% and female-only teams accounted for only 2 percent. However, female patents have been increasing over time, from 1.7% in 1980 to 7.8% in 2010. Female patenting rates also vary widely between companies and organizations (ranging from 5–30%), which indicates that workplaces can create conditions that increase female patenting.
Another reason why female patent rates are so low may be due to the types of technical positions that women typically hold. In a 2008 NCWIT study, women were more likely to hold executor than creator roles. Dice's 2013 annual salary survey found that the top five tech occupations for women and men differed significantly, with "Project Manager" as the top position for women and "Software Engineer" as the top position for men. In fact, a 2016 Glassdoor survey which found that out of 25 high profile tech companies, only 4 companies had higher rates of satisfied women than men, 15 with men more satisfied than women, and 6 with equal satisfaction. Lack of creative opportunities, feelings of being stuck in place, and difficulty advancing into leadership roles especially for minorities and women of color, push younger women to search for advancement elsewhere.
Solution: Create and track pathways for advancement, encourage innovation, and sponsor underrepresented employees.
Create clear pathways for internal advancement. There is high demand for internal mobility for women in tech. Of women who said they wanted to switch roles internally, 80% said they would stay if there was a clear way to do it.
Track what kinds of tech roles women are in. Collecting data on what kinds of roles women occupy such as leadership, creative and core technical roles, patenting, etc. will help with deciding where to focus employee development efforts. Current efforts to disclose diversity reports across Fortune 500 companies have a long way to go.

Source: Fortune Magazine (2017)Encourage innovation. Creating company-wide development opportunities for employees to participate in technical professional development on company time allows employees to not feel pressured on time as a barrier to improving technical, leadership, or management skills.
Actively sponsor underrepresented employees. Sponsors, or leaders, are usually two or three more levels above their protégés and can make a big difference, particularly by increasing their protégés' visibility and advancement. Women who were mothers specifically cited sponsorship as helping them stay employed with children, with 85% staying employed as opposed to 58% without a sponsor.

Problem: Unfair compensation compared with male peers
Earlier this year, a class-action lawsuit of more than 4,200 plaintiffs was brought against Oracle, one of Silicon Valley's largest corporation for wage discrimination against women. The lawsuit claimed that female employees were paid an average of $13,000 less than their male counterparts. Indeed, Hired.com's 2019 Wage Inequality Report found that 60% of the time, men are offered higher salaries than women for the same job at the same company. And even after controlling for factors like demographics, education, and employment, women earn 6–7% less than their male counterparts at all levels of education in science and engineering fields.
Source: National Science Board, Science & Engineering Indicators 2018The wage gap widens in underrepresented groups such as Black and Hispanic women, who earn on average $0.89 and $0.91 for every dollar White and Asian men make. Women also ask for lower salaries than men 61% of the time. While these numbers are improving (69% in 2017 to 66% in 2018), there is still work to be done to encourage women to ask for their fair share.
Solution: Provide women with fair pay and given them the tools to negotiate and advance.
Improve salary transparency. According to Indeed, 40% of women said they wish employers were "more transparent" about salary in the interview process. Wage growth was also the most commonly cited problem women expected to have later in their careers. Employers should begin to post salary in the job description to help women negotiate a more fair compensation for their role.
Empower women to negotiate and ask for promotions. When employers provide salary information, they give women the statistics to know and prove their market value. Sponsors, as mentioned before, also empower their protégés to advance towards higher levels in the company.

Problem: Little support of management
Unsurprisingly, A 2016 NCWIT report found that there were no personal or psychological differences out of all women who left the engineering field after several years. Rather, the primary difference in women who left was related to their experience of the workplace environment. From the report, "Women who left were less likely to report opportunities for training and development, support from a manager, and support for balancing work and other competing responsibilities. They were also more likely to report undermining behavior from managers." Simply put, employees left managers, not companies. Managers therefore must be trained to know the available resources, give regular feedback,  and discuss clear career paths and goals to help women advance in their careers.
Solution: Synergistically train managers while enlisting  top leadership support.
Improve manager relationships. Research suggests that employees leave managers, not companies. Even if a company has great policies and programs in place, they will do little if managers don't provide access to these opportunities. Improve manager relationships by educating managers about bias and how to address it early. 
Enlist top leadership support. The leadership of senior executives and employees will ensure that diversity efforts will be made, have the authority to be carried out, and be enforced. When leaders are visibly involved, it holds them and the company accountable for reaching their goals. Other efforts like diversity and bias training become so much more effective when used with top leadership and institutional accountability.



---

Generational changes I'd like to see
As someone entering the technology industry in less than a year learning about the barriers that are no doubt ahead of me, I can't help but feel a little discouraged. And yet, I'm hopeful. I want to be a part of the change that is already happening. 1 out of 3 Gen Z women in my class will be among the first generation entering the workforce with exposure to computer science and programming before age 16. Women like myself (and more importantly, different from myself) are learning quickly and speaking up.
So let's not forget that when a company's technology or culture threatens the very diversity they are trying to recruit, there is a clear disconnect between the women and minorities who work and the support and culture they need to stay. Companies must hire not only women, but hire intersectionally while diversifying the technical roles that women hold. They must make strides in training managers. They must publish salary information and establish clear pathways for advancement within the company, lest women and underrepresented groups look elsewhere for a more rewarding career. 
Clearly, pipeline efforts such as RTC and GHC are making an impact in improving the pipeline for women to get technology jobs (I feel tremendously supported by RTC and I got my first industry internship through GHC). But companies, their culture, mission, management, and products ultimately influence whether women and minorities will stay. With issues like algorithmic bias and misinformation in technology and media, minorities are needed now more than ever to make sure that products and services are designed with good intention for all.
And so, I'm hopeful. I'm excited to enter the industry armed with knowledge of my value and to never forget to advocate for myself. I'm excited for the opportunity to work on the problems of the future. I'm excited to overcome.

